README.md, before:

# Bayesian Hack

This is a small project that follows the Expectation Maximisation (EM) tutorial here:
http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-825-techniques-in-artificial-intelligence-sma-5504-fall-2002/lecture-notes/Lecture18FinalPart1.pdf


With the following probabilistic graphical model (PGM) libraries:

* MALLET via GRMM (http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/grmm/)
* SamIam via inflib.jar (http://reasoning.cs.ucla.edu/samiam/)
* SMILE via JSmile (http://genie.sis.pitt.edu/index.php/downloads)


I also performed hand-calculations in a spreadsheet to provide a sanity-check on the results.


### Running the project

The repo is a Java Maven project, built in Netbeans 7.3.

The project contains 3 packages, one for each library.

Each pakcage contains a class with a main, so that they can be executed.

Both the GRMM and SamIam examples run "as is" - that is, you should just be able to run the file from the IDE (or CLI with classpath including the respective jar files).

The SMILE example uses JSmile, the JNI interface for the C++ SMILE library.


In order to execute the code, you will need to download SMILE binaries and the JSmile JNI files from the SMILE website (here)
Next, you will need to edit environment PATH var to include the SMILE C++ binaries.
The Maven config contains the -Djava.library.path runtime argument.  It is currently set to /path/to/smile/JNI/ so you will need to change this to point to the directory on your sstem that includes the JNI files for JSmile.

Required data (simple CSV) and initial model files (a SamIam .net file) are includes in the resources directory.


### Observations

GRMM - I used the factor operations in GRMM to implement EM on this model.  This is pretty neat, but a little cumbersome to get set up and difficult to generalise.

SAMIAM - I found that the iteration and thresholding didn't work (or at least I couldn't set it up correctly) so I wrote my own iteration loop.  This did require writing out network files and reseting the LearningData object in each iteration.  I've mailed the SamIam team, but had no response as yet.

The results from GRMM and SamIam agreed with my hand-crafted calculations - the values described in the tutorial.

SMILE - The documentation of Smile and JSmile is a little sparse, though there is enough to get going.  However, the resultant learned CPTs did not match GRMM, SamIam or the tutorial values.  While this is possible, as there, there is not enough info on the site to easily understand what is going on.


If anyone has any advice, improvements or suggestions on how best to use these libraries, I'd be grateful to hear it!

Commit message:

JSmile initial network
Added initial CPT definitions to the JSmile example, plus some minor
typo corrections.

README.md, after:

# Bayesian Hack

This is a small project that follows the Expectation Maximisation (EM) tutorial here:
http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-825-techniques-in-artificial-intelligence-sma-5504-fall-2002/lecture-notes/Lecture18FinalPart1.pdf


With the following probabilistic graphical model (PGM) libraries:

* MALLET via GRMM (http://mallet.cs.umass.edu/grmm/)
* SamIam via inflib.jar (http://reasoning.cs.ucla.edu/samiam/)
* SMILE via JSmile (http://genie.sis.pitt.edu/index.php/downloads)


I also performed hand-calculations in a spreadsheet to provide a sanity-check on the results.


### Running the project

The repo is a Java Maven project, built in Netbeans 7.3.

The project contains 3 packages, one for each library.

Each pakcage contains a class with a main, so that they can be executed.

Both the GRMM and SamIam examples run "as is" - that is, you should just be able to run the file from the IDE (or CLI with classpath including the respective jar files).

The SMILE example uses JSmile, the JNI interface for the C++ SMILE library.


In order to execute the code, you will need to download SMILE binaries and the JSmile JNI files from the SMILE website (here)
Next, you will need to edit environment PATH var to include the SMILE C++ binaries.
The Maven config contains the -Djava.library.path runtime argument.  It is currently set to /path/to/smile/JNI/ so you will need to change this to point to the directory on your sstem that includes the JNI files for JSmile.

Required data (simple CSV) and initial model files (a SamIam .net file) are includes in the resources directory.


### Observations

GRMM - I used the factor operations in GRMM to implement EM on this model.  This is pretty neat, but a little cumbersome to get set up and difficult to generalise.

SAMIAM - I found that the iteration and thresholding didn't work (or at least I couldn't set it up correctly) so I wrote my own iteration loop.  This did require writing out network files and reseting the LearningData object in each iteration.  I've mailed the SamIam team, but had no response as yet.

The results from GRMM and SamIam agreed with my hand-crafted calculations - the values described in the tutorial.

SMILE - The documentation of Smile and JSmile is a little sparse, though there is enough to get going.  However, the resultant learned CPTs did not match GRMM, SamIam or the tutorial values.... there is not enough info on the site to easily understand what is going on.  I posted to the JSmile forum and got some useful info here:
* http://genie.sis.pitt.edu/forum/viewtopic.php?f=2&t=1098



If anyone has any advice, improvements or suggestions on how best to use these libraries, I'd be grateful to hear it!
